There exists many frameworks and libraries in Dart that can be used to make a REST API, to serve static files or just
to handle HTTP requests. Many of those use `shelf` under the hood.

The reason why I want to talk about `shelf` is pretty simple: once you understand `shelf`, you pretty much understand the basis of many other web server-oriented frameworks framework out there ([Redstone.dart](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/redstone), [mojito](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/mojito), [bridge](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/bridge), etc.)

## What is shelf?

* A web server middleware for Dart
* A very flexible library that makes it easy to create and compose web servers and parts of web servers.
* A pretty simple library that exposes a great set of easy to use abstractions

## The vocabulary

### Handler
A `Handler` is a function that receives a `Request` object (which represents an HTTP request in a `shelf` application), and handles it (duh!). And by "handling" it, I mean that it can inspect it, modify it, read its content, etc.

### Middleware
A `Middleware` can provide additional behaviour to a `Handler`, by executing code before or after the execution of the extended handler.

### Pipeline
A helper that makes it easy to compose a set of `Middleware`s and a `Handler`. With this, you can wrap a `handler` with multiple levels of `Middleware`s.

### Cascade
A helper that calls several handlers in sequence and returns the first acceptable response. This is useful when you want to aggregate multiple `Handler` functions for your web server.

## Usage
Here are some examples of usages for each of the components previously described. To get started you need to :

* [Create a shelf_server project with stagehand](/creating-a-dart-project)
* [Add shelf as a dependency to your project](https://www.dartlang.org/tools/pub/dependencies.html#hosted-packages). By adding `shelf: "^0.6.4+2"` to your `pubspec.yaml` file.

### Handler
A handler is expected to return a `Response` object (which represents an HTTP response in a `shelf` application).

Example:

```dart
import 'package:shelf/shelf.dart';
import 'package:shelf/shelf_io.dart' as io;

void main(List<String> args) {
  Response echoHandler(Request request) =>
      new Response.ok("You've requested ${request.url}");

  io.serve(echoHandler, 'localhost', 8080);
}
```

This piece of code will listen to all incoming requests on `localhost` and return an `OK` response with the URL that was requested as the body.
You can try this by running `dart bin/server.dart`.

### Middleware
A function that accepts a `Handler` as argument. `shelf` exposes a utility function called `createMiddleWare` that helps us create a `Middleware`.

Here's its signature:

```dart
Middleware createMiddleware({requestHandler(Request request),
    responseHandler(Response response),
    errorHandler(error, StackTrace stackTrace)})
```

It can take:

* A `requestHandler` function. When provided, the `Middleware` process the request.
    - This function takes as argument a `Request` object, and can return a `Response` or `null`. If it returns a response, the chain stops there, and the request was handled. If it returns `null`, the request is given to the inner handler.
* A `responseHandler` function. When omitted, the `Middleware` doesn't process the request.
    - This function takes as argument a `Response` object, and should return a `Response` object. If nothing was modified on the `Response`, it should just return the original one. Otherwise the modified one or a new one should be returned. 
* An `errorHandler` function. 

### Pipeline
An object that accepts multiple `Middleware`s and a handler.

Example:

```dart
var handler = const Pipeline()
    .addMiddleware(loggingMiddleware)
    .addMiddleware(cachingMiddleware)
    .addHandler(application);
```

The last `Middleware` added will be the last to process a request and the first to process a response.

### Cascade
A `Cascade` object sequentially calls its inner `Handler`s to dispatch a `Request`. It has a few mechanisms to know if a `Handler` could handle a request or not.

The first one is to give the `Cascade` a list of integers representing unacceptable (unhandled) status codes. For example, if one handler returns a `Response.notFound()` and you gave the parameter `statusCodes` a list containing `404`, then the `Cascade` would dispatch the request to the next handler.

The next mechanism is to give the `Cascade` the parameter `shouldCascade`, which is a function that inspects the `Response` object returned by the previous handler. For example, you could make the `Cascade` only dispatch `null` `Response`s by declaring it like this:

```dart
  var cascade =
      new Cascade(shouldCascade: (Response r) => r == null)
          .add(getUsersHandler)
          .add(addUserHandler);
```

## Working example
This example is just a basic API that allows you to create users from an specific endpoint, and allows you to retrieve them with another endpoint. The complete code can be found [here](url to repo).

Let's modify `bin/server.dart`. 

Make sure you have the required imports:

```dart
import 'package:shelf/shelf.dart';
import 'package:shelf/shelf_io.dart' as io;
import 'dart:convert';
```

Create the `addUserHandler` and `getUsersHandler` functions:

```dart
Response addUserHandler(Request request) {
  if (request.url.path == "users" && request.method == 'POST') {
    var usernameParam = request.url.queryParameters['username'];
    if (usernameParam == null) {
      return new Response(400, body: "No username was provided");
    } else {
      users.add(usernameParam);
      return new Response.ok("");
    }
  } else {
    return null;
  }
}

Response getUsersHandler(Request request) {
  if (request.url.path == "users" && request.method == 'GET') {
    return new Response.ok(JSON.encode(users));
  } else {
    return null;
  }
}
```

Add the shared `List` containing the users' name as a top level variable :
```dart
List<String> users = [];
```

Create a middleware that prints the requested path for each requests.

```dart
Middleware logMiddleware = createMiddleware(
    requestHandler: (Request r) => print('Requested url: ${r.url}'));
```

Create the pipelines for both handlers:

```dart
  var addUserPipeline =
      const Pipeline().addMiddleware(logMiddleware).addHandler(addUserHandler);

  var getUsersPipeline =
      const Pipeline().addMiddleware(logMiddleware).addHandler(getUsersHandler);
```

Merge the two `Pipeline`s into a `Cascade`:

```dart
var cascade = new Cascade(shouldCascade: (Response r) => r == null)
    .add(addUserPipeline)
    .add(getUsersPipeline);
```

And finally serve the `Cascade`'s `Handler` with `dart:io`. Here's the final `main()` function:

```dart
main(List<String> args) async {
  var addUserPipeline =
      const Pipeline().addMiddleware(logMiddleware).addHandler(addUserHandler);

  var getUsersPipeline =
      const Pipeline().addMiddleware(logMiddleware).addHandler(getUsersHandler);

  var cascade = new Cascade(shouldCascade: (Response r) => r == null)
      .add(addUserPipeline)
      .add(getUsersPipeline);

  var server = await io.serve(cascade.handler, 'localhost', 8080);
  print('Serving at http://${server.address.host}:${server.port}');
}
```
If everything went good, you should be able to test both endpoints.

To add a user to the list:

```bash
curl -d -- http://localhost:8080/users\?username\=johnny -v
```

and to get all the users:

```bash
curl -g -- http://localhost:8080/users
```

Voilà!

## Things to consider
As you might have noticed, I had to make my own "routing" mechanism by parsing urls in each handlers. This is really cumbersome and not very scalable. Luckily, `shelf` has a bunch of plugins publicly available ([shelf_route](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/shelf_route), [shelf_rest](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/shelf_rest) and [mojito](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/mojito), just to name a few). There are a few you can use to simplify this task.

My next post will be a short one on how to do routing with shelf in a much simpler way.

As of right now, you should understand how `shelf` works, and be ready to build a simple web server. You should also be able to understand code from many other packages using `shelf`, and contribute to them.

Happy coding!
